---
title:  "How to set up UI in an Unreal project"
excerpt: "Use C++ and Blueprints to create a solid foundation for your game UI."
date:   2020-10-14 00:00:00 +0000
tags:
- cpp
- ui
header:
  inline-image: /assets/unreal/hud-class-diagram.webp
  teaser: /assets/unreal/ui-setup-title-small.webp
---

It's tough to know where to start when setting up the UI for your game.
There are a lot of existing Unreal classes that are suitable for housing your
UI-related code. I'll describe what has worked for me so far.

1. First, we will create some base C++ classes from which our Blueprints will
derive.
2. Then we will create the Blueprint subclasses, and make Unreal use them.
3. We will add example functions to create a widget on calling `ShowMenu()`,
   and hide on calling `HideMenu()`.

# Create C++ Subclasses

A lot of Unreal setup boils down to subclassing existing classes to specify
custom behaviour. In this case we will need to subclass `AGameModeBase` and
`AHUD` in order to set up our custom UI manager. 

## Create C++ Subclass of `AGameModeBase`

If you haven't done it already, create a C++ or Blueprint subclass of
`AGameModeBase`.  We will need to use this to specify which HUD class is used
in our levels. It's useful in general for choosing custom subclasses of
`APlayerController`, `AGameState` and other core classes.

I recommend creating a **C++ base class**, and then a **Blueprint
subclass of that**. I prefer to write logic in the C++ class so debugging and
breakpoints are all available from C++ and then use Blueprint-exposed
properties to connect things together and set gameplay variable values.

For this example we will be using the naming conventions described in [UI Best
Practices]({% link _posts/tutorials/2019-09-15-ui-best-practices.md %}).

The easiest way to create a new C++ subclass is under `File > New C++ Class`

{%
include img.html
file="/unreal/gamemode-class-diagram.webp"
title="Class diagram for our game mode class and Blueprint"
%}

The default generated C++ is fine for what we need. We will be specifying our
custom `AHUD` subclass in the blueprint.

```cpp
#pragma once

#include "GameFramework/GameModeBase.h"
#include "BUIGameModeBase.generated.h"

UCLASS()
class ABUIGameModeBase : public AGameModeBase
{
	GENERATED_BODY()
	
};
```

As a side-note there is also a built-in Unreal class named `AGameMode`, but
I would recommend using `AGameModeBase`. `AGameMode` is somewhat of a relic
Unreal Engine's past as an engine that focused on match-based shooters, and
comes with a lot of built-in functionality that is not always useful.


## Create C++ Subclass of `AHUD`

In the same way we created a subclass of `AGameModeBase`, now we will create
a C++ subclass of `AHUD`. `AHUD` is a class that is created by and owned by
`APlayerController`. For our purposes it will do fine.


{%
include img.html
file="/unreal/hud-class-diagram.webp"
title="Class diagram for our custom subclasses of AHUD."
%}

```cpp
#pragma once

#include "GameFramework/HUD.h"
#include "BUIHUD.generated.h"

UCLASS()
class ABUIHUD : public AHUD
{
	GENERATED_BODY()
	
};
```

The default `BUIHUD.h` and `BUIHUD.cpp` are OK, we will be adding functionality
to it after we have hooked them up in Unreal.

# Create Blueprint subclasses

Now that we have created C++ classes `ABUIGameModeBase` and `ABUIHUD`, we can
re-start Unreal and create our Blueprint subclasses.

Right-click in the Content Browser, and choose **Blueprint Class** from the
pop-up menu. See the diagram below

* We will now need to set the C++ parent class for this Blueprint. Choose
`BUIGameModeBase` and name your blueprint `BP_GameMode`.
* Do the same for `BUIHUD`, creating a Blueprint called `BP_HUD`.

{%
include img.html
file="/unreal/bp-gamemode.webp"
title="Creating Blueprint subclass of ABUIGameModeBase"
%}

With both Blueprints created, we can now set `BP_GameMode` to use `BP_HUD` as
its HUD class.

{%
include img.html
file="/unreal/bp-gamemode-properties.webp"
%}

# World Settings

In order for our custom `BP_GameMode` Blueprint to be used, we must set it in
the World Settings for our level. This window can be opened with:

> Window > World Settings.

Then choose `BP_GameMode` from the **GameMode Override** dropdown.

{%
include img.html
file="/unreal/world-settings-bp-gamemode.webp"
title="Set the custom BP_GameMode in World Settings"
%}

# Using HUD Subclass to Create Example Main Menu

Phew, that was a lot of set-up, but thankfully we only have to do it once.
Adding functionality from now on will be much easier.

We can now use our `ABUIHUD` class as the manager for our UI. 

Let's add an example function that creates a MainMenu widget when a function is
called.

{%
include figure-begin.html
title="BUIHUD.h"
code="cpp"
%}
```cpp
#pragma once

#include "GameFramework/HUD.h"

#include "BUIHUD.generated.h"

UCLASS(Abstract)
class ABUIHUD : public AHUD
{
	GENERATED_BODY()

public:
	// Make BlueprintCallable for testing
	UFUNCTION(BlueprintCallable)
	void ShowMainMenu();

	UFUNCTION(BlueprintCallable)
	void HideMainMenu();
	
protected:
	UPROPERTY(EditDefaultsOnly)
	TSubclassOf<class UUserWidget> MainMenuClass;

	// Keep a pointer to be able to hide it
	UPROPERTY()
	TObjectPtr<UUserWidget> MainMenu;
};
```
{%
include figure-end.html
%}

{%
include figure-begin.html
title="BUIHUD.cpp"
code="cpp"
%}
```cpp
#include "BUIHUD.h"
#include "GameFramework/PlayerController.h"
#include "Blueprint/UserWidget.h"
#include "Kismet/GameplayStatics.h"

void ABUIHUD::ShowMainMenu()
{
	// Make widget owned by our PlayerController
	APlayerController* PC = Cast<APlayerController>(GetOwner());
	MainMenu = CreateWidget<UUserWidget>(PC, MainMenuClass);

	MainMenu->AddToViewport();
}

void ABUIHUD::HideMainMenu()
{
	if (MainMenu)
	{
		MainMenu->RemoveFromViewport();
		MainMenu = nullptr;
	}
}
```
{%
include figure-end.html
%}

If we create a test main menu `UUserWidget` Blueprint, and set the
`MainMenuClass` property in `BP_HUD`, we can spawn it when the `ShowMainMenu()`
function is called.

{%
include img.html
file="/unreal/bp-hud.webp"
%}

## Showing Main Menu from C++

From C++ showing the main menu would look like this:

```cpp
APlayerController* PC = UGameplayStatics::GetPlayerController(GetWorld());
ABUIHUD* HUD = PC->GetHUD<ABUIHUD>();
HUD->ShowMainMenu();
```

## Showing Main Menu from Blueprints

From Blueprints showing the main menu would look like this:

{%
include img.html
file="/unreal/hud-test-blueprint.webp"
title="Simple test Blueprint to show and hide the main menu"
%}

# Final Result

Look, we have a menu, managed in a `AHUD` subclass, and created via C++! 

{%
include img.html
file="/unreal/ui-setup-final.webp"
%}

